We're talking to Alfred Kazin here, if you just don't mind that.
I think an interesting place to start is that you quote Edmund Wilson three times in this new book to the extent that we have to, I'm paraphrasing, but we no longer need religion.
Do you find that quote as a counterpoint maybe to the theme of this book?
Well, no, it was just... We must live without religion is what he says, right?
Did I quote that three times?
I found it three times.
In the same book?
In this book, yes.
Yeah, very good.
Okay.
Now, Wilson represents, like Mencken and many people in the 20s, which is his real period.
He typically represents, I make that clear in the book, what I call his revolt against his fathers, you know.
His grandfather was a Presbyterian minister, and, you know, at one point in my book, I know all the writers,
Wallace Stevens, H.L.
Mencken, Sinclair Lewis, of the 20s, who all revolted one way or another against their father's religion.
And that's only, it has no relationship to anything that I believe or that is going on right now.
I see, but I'm just wondering if it's kind of a, because you certainly are tracing the influence of religion and it's almost a counterpoint theme, I find.
No, it's not.
It's not, okay.
No, I said it's a personal remark.
Wilson was a very cranky, very self-opinionated man who had made up his mind that, quote, we have to live without religion.
But this did not affect some of the writers of the 20s, like Frost and Steve.
It was his own personal thing itself.
This book appears 55 years after your first book.
Yes.
Do you think this book is appropriate for this point in your career?
I don't know what that means.
Well, do you think it's a...
It's part of a continuum.
I don't think of those terms.
You don't?
I don't think of what my career, I don't think what's appropriate, anything like that.
A lot of my books came out of a deep personal urgency, which had nothing to do with anything except my own problems or my own interests.
I don't think about my career.
I don't believe in careers.
I wrote this book because I've always had a longstanding interest in the subject over 20 years.
And so the book finally became a real thing for me.
But it's nothing to do with being appropriate to my career.
Well, maybe that's the wrong... So do you see a... I hesitate to use the word corpus, but certainly there is a... Let me explain it again.
Okay, okay.
You may find this peculiar, but I don't... I'm not interested in my career.
I don't believe that careers are interesting except, well, to people who... If someone wants to say, this is his career, okay.
But I don't think of a work which is going to be appropriate to my career.
That puzzles you.
I can see that.
But the fact is, that's true.
I didn't write this book to fill out anything.
I wrote on native grounds, published in 1942, because that was the time to write it for me.
For me, not for... I don't look around and say, the country needs a book like this.
You understand?
Yes, sir.
Yes.
What I say is, I want to write a book like this for myself.
All my books come out of my deep personal interest and the rest of it.
What are you working on now?
Well, I can't talk about it because I haven't made up my mind about it.
The book I'm thinking about hasn't quite gelled up my mind.
Again, it's a personal book.
I say personal, my approach to it.
Someone pointed out, someone in the reviewer pointed out very properly that when you read my book, Garth the American Right, you realize that I am like some of the characters I'm writing about.
That's the point, you see.
You mentioned that Melville was transformed by reading Hawthorne.
I love that word, transformed.
Have you ever been transformed by reading anyone?
Of course.
I'm constantly transformed by books.
The word transformed is exactly what I go through when I read all sorts of things.
When we read Moby Dick, which I edited many years ago, I'm always transformed by certain books.
That's a function of a book critic.
There's a certain level of personal excitement in Revelation that occurs between the writer and the book.
And you say you're constantly being transformed even by the same books that you first had contact with?
Well, of course.
If a book is important to you, you keep on reading.
I reread many books.
There's a Bible, the Old and New Testaments.
What does your name come from, Balabanus?
Bazbanes.
It's Greek.
Yeah.
Well, when I reread certain passages in Plato, The Myth of the Cave and The Republic and that sort of thing, I'm transported.
Anything which makes me feel that somebody I'm reading has a great and wonderful mind and a great view of life transports me.
You know why am I jumping around, I hope, as a question?
How am I going to stop you?
You mentioned in New York Jew, which I love, that opening section in 315 at the New York Public Library.
Yeah, yeah.
I love that whole section.
I'm really going to write an appreciation of reading rooms.
You mentioned that you spent five years working up, making your way, reading, to read that, to be able to write that book.
Did you have a sense during those five years,
where you were headed, or were you just reading, were you just kind of... Did I have a sense of what?
A sense of the book that you were working towards, of what you were formulating as a work of criticism.
Well, of course, but I'm not sure I understand your question exactly.
Well, I'm just wondering if you were reading to transform yourself, or if you were... No, no, you put these things in a way that I find not easy to understand.
You pick a subject,
It was the 1930s.
I was a young man.
The country was in crisis.
American literature was coming back.
Not coming back.
It was becoming, for the first time, an important literature for a lot of people.
And I got fascinated by starting the book in the 80s and 90s, where no one usually starts, and writing about it.
If you know the book, you know that I wasn't transported.
I just used the word about classics, which reinvigorated me.
OK.
And you also mentioned that you had, they almost sound like ecstatic days in Room 315, where you had long, full-day bouts with reading.
Yes, yes.
Do you continue to have full-day bouts?
Of course I can.
I'm now 82, and like any gentleman of 82, I have physical problems.
But of course, as you can tell from my recent book, God, the American Writer, that I still work with the same intensity I always did.
I may be slowing up in a year or two, but the moment I'm okay.
Of course, the first, when you were working with that first book, did you expect that you would spend your entire career really studying American literature?
No, not at all.
I expected nothing, except to be drafted.
It was during the war period.
And when the war was, when I finished my book, I was indeed summoned by it.
the draft board and the rest of it.
It was wartime.
You know what was going on there.
I had no expectations.
The success of the book surprised me.
I was very glad.
But I also had personal problems, personal things, which interested me much more at that point.
You mentioned a question or two back, the function of the critic.
Do you have a sense of your reader?
Do you have a sense of who you're writing for?
Oh, absolutely.
A lot of professors write for each other.
I do write for what Virginia Woolf called the common reader.
I'm a common reader myself.
I read many critics, like I just had a piece about the English critic V.S.
Pritchett for the Times Book Review.
When I read him, he's talking to me and I learn from him.
And when I write something and the writer says to me, I never thought of that before, that's very good.
Of course, I don't aim at the reader.
I aim to express what I myself most deeply feel.
But if you do that successfully, then of course the reader receives your message.
Do you hear from your readers?
Of course.
Of course a lot of people write to me.
Do you, you know, we were talking about the demise of libraries.
I just came back from San Francisco where they opened a brand new library, and I sent 200,000 books off to the landfill.
you know, because they didn't fit on the shelves of the new library.
Do you think about this at all?
Of course.
Well, I mean, everybody knows what's going on right now.
There's no question that television and movies and the media generally have taken away a lot of the appeal.
People don't read the way they used to.
On the other hand, there's a vast publication industry.
But, of course, there's a great interest in getting bestsellers and the rest of it.
I think the literacy is not what it used to be, for a very good reason that it isn't.
You know, I was just reading a book the other night, When Russia Learned to Read.
I don't know if you're familiar with that book.
It was published in 1985.
No, I don't know it.
But a very interesting statistic, and they're able to look at census figures, people who were able to sign their forms, and it was taxation.
In 1897, only 21% of the Russian population could read.
And yet this was a period when you had the great novelists.
I mean, the great Russian novelists.
Nobody surprised you.
There's nothing surprising about that.
Russia was a closed society.
There was no liberty.
There was no freedom.
That's why my mother and father, born in Russia, eventually found their way individually to America.
Also, the great Russian writers, after Chekhov,
were all aristocrats.
They belonged to a very special class.
So they were writing for their peers?
No, they weren't writing for their peers.
They were writing an attempt.
No.
Well, that's my point.
If 80% of the people in their country couldn't read, who were they writing for?
Well, enough people read them, and also they had a vast international audience.
I mean, Tolstoy is as well known as Tolson Dostoevsky.
Of course.
To read it before.
Okay.
It's not an arithmetical subject.
I guess I'm trying to put it in the context that people are saying, well, literacy is declining in this nation.
I wonder if that's relevant to whether or not serious literature will continue to be produced regardless of how many people.
Well, that question is raised all the time, and you'll be happy to hear that I have no answer, whatever.
So long as there are writers, so long as there are a lot of them, after all, everybody,
Everybody knows every day there's some new young novelist.
And there are all sorts of people coming into the literary world, women, blacks, Hispanics, who never wrote before.
I, as a Jew, among the first two, I mean, after all, there weren't many Jewish writers at the beginning of the 20th century.
And now, since the 40s, there have been a great many.
We've all been liberated.
We've all been sprung free to write.
But the question, go back to Russia.
There was a vast population of Russians.
That small percentage, nevertheless, involved a great many readers.
All the great Russian writers wrote for a general audience the way Victor Hugo did in France, the way Dickens did in England, etc.
I gather from what I read that you would certainly consider Faulkner the great American novelist of the 20th century.
Yes, I do.
and Melville, of course, the great American novelist of the 19th century.
I'm striving for something here.
What are you striving for?
Well, it's interesting that they were both basically rejected in their lifetimes.
And you also say here that Melville, at a moment of peak, hit Billy Budd for the 20th century.
No, wait a second, wait a second.
You're talking too loosely here.
In the first place, Melville was rejected.
And he stopped writing.
And there's no question that, you know, he wrote poetry near the end of his life, privately published.
I say all that in my book.
And it was supported by an uncle.
And then, you know, he made a living as a customs inspector.
For Faulkner was not rejected in any way.
Well, he rejected, but you mentioned that it was Malcolm Cowley that made it possible for him to be accepted.
Excuse me, the fact remains that around the time, well, you know, Faulkner is an original.
Many people, including myself and on native grounds, didn't pay proper appreciation to him because he is so original.
And when we began, the boom be began, his renaissance began in the late 40s.
But all his great books, the greatest books, were written in 1930s, published in 1930s and 40s.
But you can hardly speak of rejection of a man who at one time had to make a living writing motion pictures, but the other hand got the Nobel Prize and became the great figure.
So there's no real comparison.
There's no comparison, and rejection, of course, is a very severe word.
But by the same token, you mentioned that it was Malcolm Cowley who was very influential in bringing a reader.
Yes, he was.
An appreciative readership, so far.
But it wasn't the only, it was one.
I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
No, finish.
Well, do you think that Faulkner would still enjoy the stature he does today without Cowley's help?
Yes, yes.
Cowley didn't perform any miracles.
Well, he did the portable, the... He did a lot, but the fact remains that Faulkner owes a lot of his reputation to the fact that the universities, especially in the South, were more open now, you know, and Faulkner was the hero of a great many Southern writers.
And they did a great deal to bring it up, you know.
To go back to Melville and to separate him off from Faulkner then, is it a phenomenon that somebody so ahead of his time does have to wait a while for a new generation to accept him?
Well, you asked me a question, and you are a literary reporter, right?
Yes, sir.
But you know the answer as well as I do to that.
You can't think of any examples for yourself.
Of course I can, but I... The most famous example was Emily Dickinson, who was hardly published at all in her time.
Did she want to be published in her view, do you think?
I think she did, but there was no opportunity, for one reason or another.
She was discouraged, actually, by her... She wasn't, she wasn't, no.
The question didn't come up until her death.
She wasn't discouraged, and she wasn't encouraged.
She was all alone.
The idea of a spinster living...
in the leading family of Amherst writing poetry, it didn't mean very much people.
People were not as open as they are right now about these things.
You mentioned how you got to know Robert Frost and you would walk with him one-on-one.
You would be an audience of one, you would say.
I was the audience.
You were the audience of one, is what you were saying.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I'm wondering how much
What impact does it have on you to go beyond the work and to know the author personally or the individual?
If I know the author, as I did, I got to know Frost by an accident of my being a professor briefly at Amherst College.
It means a great deal, but it doesn't mix up your value of the work.
I never met Emily Dickinson, but I know what she was like, and I love her poetry.
It all depends upon your contact with the writer.
Had you known Faulkner, would you think there would be others?
I couldn't have known Faulkner.
Faulkner was extremely asocial.
A friend of mine once saw him in the waiting room at Random House, waiting to see his editor.
And he got very excited, went over to him, hoping to have a conversation.
And Faulkner rebuffed him and said, I didn't come here to talk.
I only heard him show him once in my life, when he won the National Book Award for
one of his inferior novels, the one about the Christ in the trenches in the First World War.
Anyway, then he just mumbled a few words to his audience and walked off.
There's a wonderful story about how Bennett Cerf gave a party for Faulkner one night,
and Alfred Knopf came with some books that he wanted him to sign, and Faulkner refused to do it.
He said, I make money doing these things.
I don't believe that story for a minute.
It's in Blatner's biography.
I don't believe it.
You don't.
Is this his biography of Faulkner?
Yeah.
I don't think Faulkner said that, but anyway, when a man like Blatner writes a biography, you know, he's like a, he's like someone cleaning up with, he gets every little morsel he can, you know.
Is that important, talking about Faulkner?
No, of course not.
But you do point, I think what's important is that you say that Faulkner chose art over religion.
I think that's very important.
Yes, it is indeed.
I'm very proud of that.
Because the point is that the South around him, especially in his own hometown of Oxford, was full of that, you know, Southern religion, you know, which he didn't personally have no interest in.
I'm just looking at my notes.
Are these all notes from your reading here?
I didn't know that Edmund Wilson actually explored the caves where the Dead Sea Scrolls ... You mentioned that he ... I didn't say he explored the caves.
He went down there.
I don't think ... He didn't ... Excuse me, but your facts are not right.
I never saw he explore.
I never said he explored the cave.
Well, he didn't explore, but he certainly must have gone to field, get a sense of the... Yes, he did that.
Of the... That's what I mean by that.
The only people who explored the cave... I didn't mean he was an archaeologist.
I meant that he was there to... The only people who explored the cave were the original shepherds, whoever they were, who found the stuff in the cave.
Again, I don't mean... Mr. Wilson was too fat and often too drunk to get on his knees in a cave.
I didn't mean explore in terms of archaeology.
I meant in terms of going to absorb the ambience, I guess.
Of course, exactly so.
Exactly so.
Wilson was fascinated by languages.
As you already know, he didn't have any personal interest in religion, but he was a fantastic scholar.
Everything interests him.
He had the greatest gift for languages I've ever encountered.
I say that in my book.
He was reading every language.
So when the discovery was made...
He called himself a journalist in the best sense of the way.
He went down there, Kwam Ram and all those places around the Dead Sea to see what the city was like.
He describes it in his book, the Dead Sea Scrolls.
But he didn't do any exploring himself.
I didn't mean to suggest that.
I know I used the word, but I didn't mean it in a sense that he was an archaeologist.
But I guess he went to get something.
And I guess what I was trying to lead to is,
Your own travels, do you try and go places that were very close?
No, I do, and I no longer do.
But you did.
You've done that, of course.
I've done that.
I mean, in 1967, I was very lucky to be sent to Harper's to do something about the Israeli war there.
During the war, I was not a soldier, but I was a reporter in England.
And that gave me a lot of stuff.
I did that, but not out of a journalistic thing, but because I was commissioned.
When Our Native Grounds came out in 1942, the Rockefeller Foundation was very pleased that I published a book.
They had given me a fellowship to study for it.
And there was a big program going on in England, an educational program in the Army, which they wanted to document.
And since I was free to travel, and I was dying to travel,
It was a perfect match.
And I went there, and I spent the last six, seven months of the war in England.
I wrote about that in my book, in several of my books.
It was a big experience for me.
But otherwise, I never did much journalistic writing.
The essay, the long essay on Israel, the 67 War, I did for Harper's.
But since then, I haven't done very much.
Excluding anything you might have done...
in foreign countries.
How about in this country?
Have you gone to feel in a similar way the ambiance of things?
Yes, I have.
But always, not always, well, one of the big events of my life, which I describe again in my books, these are all my books, I've concealed nothing.
I'm not an inventive writer any more than Wilson was.
I write about my experiences.
In the 1940s, the great photographer Cartier Gerson and I
were assigned to do a piece for Harper's Bazaar on Lower New York and the bridges and all that, especially Brooklyn Bridge, which has been a lifelong icon of my life.
So we did that, and I wrote an article for Harper's Bazaar.
And there were many journalistic pieces I did for different places, yes, but I never did them in that, for example, Wilson was sent by the New Yorker during the Second World War to do what he put in the coverage, whereas
I've done a lot of traveling, but it was mostly because of my visiting teaching.
I've been a visiting professor in many countries.
It was all based upon a native ground, which a lot of people in Europe and elsewhere.
And I lectured in Russia and Japan and in Germany and England, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
But in all those cases, I was in a foreign country because I was a visiting professor there, not because I'd been assigned to go there.
But I mean, I'm talking specifically about this country.
Yeah, I said that.
I gave an example.
Well, New York and all its reaches has always been an obsession of mine.
But as I say, that piece I did for Harper's Bazaar was pretty much it, you know.
I've done a lot of travel writing about America, but almost always because I was assigned to give a lecture somewhere.
I was a visiting professor somewhere.
So I guess you've never felt that you had to go to a place like...
up in Western Massachusetts, near Pittsfield, to look out on Mount Greylock the way Melville might have, and to see why you would dedicate a book to a mountain.
I mean, I... Well, as a matter of fact, I did go to Western Massachusetts.
That's what I'm asking, yeah.
But that was because of my literary interest in Melville.
And that's what I'm trying to... Yeah, well, I did go.
I did go to Arrowhead, his house, and I did see a Mount Greylock through a window.
And when you're doing something like that, do you try and
and imagine what might have moved him to dedicate Pierre, for instance, to this mountain?
I don't think that way.
When I saw Mount Greylock, I was glad to see it.
It looked like a mountain.
But what really interested me was the fact that some silly girl coming in was angry because she said, oh God, the guy took the biggest room in the house, and I found this very amusing.
And that understanding that he was the reason they had the house.
I'm interested in authors' lives, because I'm interested in authors, period.
You know, always have been.
Sometimes there's a connection with the work, sometimes there's not.
But authors themselves are fascinating beings.
Would you, and this, please don't consider this a trite question, but would you say that you are a product of your reading, of the books that you've read?
No.
I'm a product of my ancestry.
of the Brooklyn neighborhood where I was born.
Reading has been a great part of my life.
I'm not a product of my reading.
You can't put it that way.
That's a question, and you answered it.
You're not, is the answer.
The answer is I'm a product of a lot of things.
I'm very much a product of Jewish history, of Jewish experience, of my parents' poverty, of this and that.
That is a...
That correspondence between Melville and Hawthorne, and what a tragedy that Melville destroyed the letters he received.
Do you have any sense of why he might have done that, why he might have destroyed those letters?
I think anybody who reads, it's quite clear that Melville was very taken with Hawthorne, admired him very much.
A lot of private people try to make some kind of incipient homosexual thing of it.
Hawthorne was not only a very happily married man, but very sexual.
And of course, as you know, if you've read the Billy Budd, things like that, you know that possibly because of his long life as a sailor, Melville was not unacquainted with what goes on in shipboarding.
Interesting.
But most important thing is that...
It was not a sexual thing that drew him to Hawthorne.
It was a recognition that he was a genius like himself, but a genius who was recognized while he was still unrecognized.
And, of course, the letters that Melville wrote to Hawthorne are all available.
And they're wonderful.
I quote some of them.
The ones you quote are magnificent.
They are magnificent.
But it's quite obvious that Hawthorne, though he admired—Hawthorne—Moby Dick was dedicated to Hawthorne.
Hawthorne admired him very much.
But they were very different people.
Hawthorne was a thoroughly married man.
Melville had a very unhappy marriage in many ways.
And it was obvious that, for one, I'm only guessing now.
I've never seen any of it.
It's obvious that Hawthorne's letters could not have been sufficient for the kind of feeling he brought the thing in.
He was probably disappointed.
Maybe they didn't give the approbation that he did.
No, I didn't say that.
No, you didn't say that.
I'm just asking.
That's the question.
I think he wanted some kind of recognition of his feeling, and I think Hawthorne gave him that, but he couldn't give him the intensity.
Melville's letters to Hawthorne are the most intense letters ever written, to my knowledge, by one writer to another.
They're extraordinary, they're wonderful.
But Hawthorne, Hawthorne was a very different kind of personality.
He was all closed up and the rest of it.
You might say that Hawthorne was always classical and Melville was always romantic, but I give that as an approximate thing, yeah.
I won't take up too much.
It's okay, it's okay.
You mentioned also that you can't think of another case where one writer's reading of another writer
has so, to use your word, transformed... Excuse me, I didn't say there was no other case like that.
I didn't say... You said that just now.
Well, I think you said it's the most... I'm paraphrasing, of course I will... No, no, the fact is that the word... It's the most dramatic case of... There's no end of cases of writers who discover everything from being another writer.
It's not at all unusual.
Well, I mean, could you...
think of any other cases that are equally as dramatic as this.
Well, how do you know?
You're telling me or you're asking me?
I'm asking you.
There are many such cases.
Whitman, for example, was inspired by Emerson.
Emerson was inspired by general literature.
That famous sentence that Melville wrote, one genius recognized another, you know, come together.
It's very common.
The writers depend upon each other in a very great sense, you know.
American literature is full of this.
Emily Dickinson was inspired by hymns of the 17th century.
She was very much inspired by Carlisle and Mrs. Browning, whose pictures she kept in her room.
In the 20th century, for example, well, you know, a lot of French writers have been
For example, Camus, the French writer, was very much influenced by Faulkner.
In Paris, 1945, I was lucky enough to hear Camus talk about Faulkner, whom he called, of course, Faulkner.
And he said, I love Faulkner.
He said, I love the dust and the heat in his work.
I'm a southerner myself.
You know that Camus came from Algeria.
No, what is remarkable about the Melville Hawthorne business,
is that novel, but it was so intense and so excited by the whole thing.
But the influences are very common.
Canuck is publishing a new biography of Camus in a month or two, I noticed from there.
I didn't know that.
In the new catalog.
By whom?
By a French writer or American writer?
I believe it's, I just saw it in the catalog.
I haven't seen the galley or the... I'm glad to hear it.
Camus is one of my heroes.
And he's a...
He supposedly was, when he won the Nobel Prize for Literature, he supposedly thought that Kazantzakis should have won.
Have you ever heard that?
You are full of rumors that I don't recognize.
I never heard that.
I don't believe it for a moment.
I don't believe it for a moment, either.
I think the Greeks would like to think that.
Kazantzakis is a very good writer, but I don't think I knew Everett.
I heard you speak at a seminar...
about 10 years ago for the Critics Circle, and you were asked by John Leonard, I think, who you read today.
And you mentioned Robert Stone, I guess, as one of the contemporary writers who you admire.
I wonder if I could ask you the same question 10 years later, who among contemporary writers?
There are many writers.
I read Robert Stone.
I'm very fond of Richard Ford, people like that.
Do you read contemporary?
Not as much as I used to.
God and American Writers, a book about the 19th century.
I spent a lot of time deep in the 19th century.
I don't keep up the way I used to.
But your focus still, in your view, is the 19th century.
No, it's not.
And you've come well into it.
I didn't say that.
What I said was, I don't keep up the way I used to.
When I'm writing now, I'm now writing a review of a new novel by...
Russell Banks, a historical novel about John Brown.
I read whatever I can, but I do have very strong interest in the past, you know.
Do you feel that fiction must be relevant?
That's a word we see thrown around by a lot of these various factions of criticism and this debate that's going on over the canon, the canon of literature.
that it must be relevant to be read, especially in the academy and in schools.
Do you have any thoughts on that?
I don't understand what you're saying.
The word relevance doesn't mean anything in here.
If you're talking about the fact that there is a canon, and that's supposed to be a canon, and that lots of writers, blacks, women, homosexuals, etc., that are trying to enlarge it, that's one thing.
But I don't see the word relevance.
Are you saying that there are writers,
who want America to be more relevant to their experience.
That's what they say, not me.
But yes, that's what people say.
Yeah, yeah.
You say, what about that?
Yes, of course that goes on.
After all, this is a thriving country.
There are always new people coming up and saying, hey, look at me.
I'm writing about the Bronx.
Well, take Don DeLillo, for example.
The book, he comes from the Bronx, the type of immigrant family.
40, 50 years ago, there wouldn't have been that interest in a book like the books by Don DeLillo.
So what is the question now that
I guess I was looking for a general comment on this debate that seems to continue on canons, on literary canons.
Well, the debate goes on only in, well, it doesn't interest me very much because I take it for granted that there's always an infusion of new blood and should be, you know.
I represent new blood from the point of view, you know, traditional American literature.
I'm the first Native American of my family.
My parents didn't speak English.
So that was New Blood, 1942, for me to write a book called On Native Grounds.
This debate, a lot of it goes on in the university, but that part doesn't interest me at all, because the university, I don't care for academic critics who are interested mostly in sort of exhibiting what they think of as their method.
My ideal critics, and I say that in many books,
He's a writer like V.S.
Pritchett or Edmund Wilson or a writer who just writes for the glory of reading literature and has no particular formula.
Pritchett was largely self-educated from his own reading, wasn't he?
Yes, he was.
He was in the leather trade.
He never went to university.
He read my forthcoming piece in the Times Book Weekend or two.
Oh, I'll read it.
And he said it was his good luck because he wasn't height-bound.
He wasn't kept in by anything.
A lot of university people take themselves much too seriously.
Well, when I hear, and as I was told, that Amherst College graduated a summa cum laude graduate and major in English literature, and this student never took a course in Shakespeare, that concerns me.
It should concern you.
How is it that somebody could proclaim to be proficient in English literature, not just literature?
Look, look, look, look, look.
I've been a professor of many colleges.
A lot of colleges, just like close corporations, you know.
I taught unhappily for three years.
It's a place that always has formulas, formulas.
When I was invited there to teach there, they had an English course.
You had to prescribe that kind of semantics, and I said, I'm not interested.
So I had my own share of American literature.
But they didn't like me, and I didn't like them, because I was not interested in that kind of formula.
One of the terrible things about universities is they always have a special idea of limitations.
If there's a guy in English who never read Shakespeare, well, someone should be shot, obviously, and it's not Shakespeare.
It just sort of goes on all the time.
Well, it's disconcerting.
We're allowing political considerations to shape conceptions of literature, and I guess... No, no, but there's a difference.
There's a difference.
If you are involved in a country like the United States, which is full of great political and racial problems, you can't help touching on these things.
Can a black write a novel without touching on the fact that he's black and that his great-grandfather was a slave?
Of course not.
It's the one thing he'll have to write about conditions the way Uncle Tom's Cabin did or Ralph Ellison did in his very good book, Invisible Man.
It's something else.
to say, you cannot write about this, or you cannot take Shakespeare.
All that is just bunk, you know.
I have to comment on Melville and the Holy Land I thought was brilliant, I have to say.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for writing that.
Thank you very much.
That allowed me, that gave me some insights that I didn't have on that writer, and that was, I wonder what inspired you to look at that, that particular aspect.
Melville, everything about Melville is of the greatest interest to me.
I'm trying to write a short story that is based upon actual... I'm fascinated by Melville as an old man in New York called Sailor Home from the Sea.
I haven't written it yet, just thinking about it.
But I would take liberties with the actual facts and present him as a man who was forgotten when he died, you know.
Totally.
Well, they've more than made up for that, haven't they?
And, of course, Billy Budd is discovered in about 1922.
It was largely a critic, I guess.
It was discovered by a graduate student, Raymond Weaver, who went to Melville's granddaughter, Eleanor Metcalf, and they found the book in a bread container, that sort of thing.
But Melville didn't want it published, perhaps.
I don't know what he did.
It's a wonderful book.
It's a work of genius, of course.
But he had sort of given up.
Thankfully, he didn't destroy it, as he destroyed the letters he received from Hawthorne.
Well, it's a different thing.
He didn't destroy his own works.
So he had faith, you think, in his work?
No, I don't... That's a question.
Look, look, you don't understand the creative process.
A man like Melville, who's been a failure in the public market, he's getting old, but he's haunted by the stories about the sea, which was the big thing in his life.
So he's haunted also by the erotic relationship story between Clackard, you know the book, of course, and Billy Budd.
And he's writing about good and evil...
Because Billy Bart is so innocent, he doesn't know what he's doing and what's happening to him.
So he writes it the way you think.
Your first question to me was, when I'm thinking about my career, well, people, perhaps some big bestseller writer, like who's the writer who writes these horror stories?
That's Stephen King.
Yeah, I guess a million or two million dollars.
No, it's more than that.
It's $10 million.
Okay, fine.
But he thinks about his career and about the money.
But he's not a writer.
He manufactures books and that sort of thing.
But Melville was not thinking about his career.
He had no career.
And Faulkner was not thinking about his career when he wrote a book called The Sound of Fury, which was turned down by publisher after publisher.
Writers don't think that way.
I mean, only businessmen do.
That's wonderful.
You know what?
It's ten minutes, eight minutes to twelve.
Yeah.
Well, I have a problem, you see, that my hip is bothering me again.
I've asked all your questions honestly, haven't I?
I hope I haven't annoyed you with some of the questions.
Okay, so what more is there to say?
Do you feel there are things still to be covered?
No, I think, do you mind inscribing a book or two for me before I leave?
No.
May I just look briefly at my notes to see if there's anything?
Do you ever handle manuscripts?
Do you ever feel anything?
You know, I've written about, you know, Stephen Jay Gould, for instance, as he has to handle the real thing to write, to write, he can't work.
I don't understand.
How can you compare me to Stephen Jay?
I'm not, I'm not, but I'm a scientist.
I understand what he says, but to be, to be suitably inspired by, I understand it, it's the printed book largely that you work from, but have you ever handled specific manuscripts and manuscripts?
Of course I have.
has given you anything that you might not have gotten from the printed book.
I guess that's what I'm asking.
Yes, but let that be the last question.
Okay.
When Mencken gave a copy of an American tragedy, of Sister Carey, excuse me, to the New York Public Library manuscript, some years ago they published the original manuscript, the original book, because the first publisher, as you must know, had been very shocked and troubled by the so-called immorality of the book.
So I went to my old hangout, New York Public Library.
I went to the manuscript room, and I read a lot of the original.
I saw a lot of it.
I wasn't surprised by anything.
I was not even sure that it was right to do the whole manuscript.
Things are like that, you know.
Inevitably, writers I know show me manuscripts and letters, things like that.
But it's not of any significance.
That's the answer to the question.